NEP-364: Efficient signature verification host functions (#364)
near/NEPs: neps/nep-0364.md

---
NEP: 364
Title: Efficient signature verification and hashing precompile functions
Author: Blas Rodriguez Irizar <rodrigblas@gmail.com>
DiscussionsTo: https://github.com/nearprotocol/neps/pull/364
Status: Draft
Type: Runtime Spec
Category: Contract
Created: 15-Jun-2022
---

## Summary

This NEP introduces the request of adding into the NEAR runtime a set of pre-compile
functions that can help IBC compatible light clients run on-chain.

## Motivation

Signature verification and hashing are ubiquitous operations in light clients,
especially in PoS consensus mechanisms. Our rough numbers say that we’ll be

> verifying ~200 signatures every minute (Polkadot’s authority set is 300 signers).

Reviewer: What does "we" here refer to? How is the number 200 calculated?

Therefore, we need a mechanism to perform these operations in a cost-effective way
in terms of gas and speed. Currently, NEAR does not have any native signature verification toolbox.
This implies that a light client operating insid NEAR will have to import a library
compiled to WASM as mentioned in [Zulip](https://near.zulipchat.com/#narrow/stream/295302-general/topic/light_client).

With regards to hashing, there are already several hashing functions implemented natively.

> For our use case, we need to be able to use `blake2b` has function, which is not available.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For our use case, we need to be able to use the `blake2b` hash function, which is not currently available.
```

Author: Removed blake2b from this NEP. Will likely create another one that requests for all the hashing functions that we need.

## Rationale and alternatives

Add

```rust

> pub fn ed25519_verify(sig: &ed25519::Signature, msg: &[u8], pub_key: &ed25519::Public) -> bool

Reviewer 3: 👀

Reviewer 2: This addition does not obviously follow from the text in the motivation section above. The motivation mentioned blake2b only. It would help if the motivation described what the signature verification algorithm looks like, at least in somewhat broad terms, so that an informed decision can be made which of these functions are sufficiently high-value additions.

Reviewer: Agree. For each host function, please explain why exactly they are needed and their specification

# transaction id DpWpK2jnyBRgZ7fScaBKULikJyvmMjDHx7AyWMrJL5VB

near call sitoula-test.testnet verify_ecdsa '{"signature_p1": [231, 117, 17, 89, 49, 142, 111, 201, 161, 107, 167, 147, 215, 167, 196, 226, 200, 176, 184, 62, 196, 240, 210, 137, 77, 198, 90, 97, 201, 212, 96, 229], "signature_p2": [1, 31, 7, 121, 178, 247, 150, 131, 108, 250, 173, 71, 100, 192, 83, 64, 145, 85, 254, 69, 176, 7, 114, 89, 64, 205, 30, 243, 193, 78, 142, 27], "msg": [107,97,106,100,108,102,107,106,97,108,107,102,106,97,107,108,102,106,100,107,108,97,100,106,102,107,108,106,97,100,115,107], "iterations": 10}' --accountId sitoula-test.testnet --gas 300000000000000
# transaction id AKFwCuQ8g2a8t9SX7vcve348BvwoU3M42MSef7gy1kPA
```

With `iterations = 130` **all these calls return ExecutionError**: `'Exceeded the maximum amount of gas allowed to burn per contract.'`

> With iterations = 50 these are the results:

Reviewer: Is one iteration one signature verification?

Author: Yes

Author: > Agree. For each host function, please explain why exactly they are needed and their specification

I've added a reference in the motivation section. Would you like it to be more specific, being included in the comment of each host function?

  Here are the results on a AMD Ryzen 9 5900X 12-Core Processor machine:

```
# 10k signature verifications
ed25519: took 387ms
ecdsa: took 324ms
shnorrkel: took 411ms
```

- Performance in wall clock time when you compile the library into wasm first and then use the single-pass compiler in Wasmer 1 to then compile to native.

```
ed25519: took 9926ms
ecdsa: took 6725ms
shnorrkel: took 10220ms
```

As an extra datapoint, when passing `--enable-simd` instead of `--singlepass`

```
ed25519: took 3085ms
ecdsa: took 1895ms
shnorrkel: took 3179ms
```

Steps to reproduce:
commit: `31cf97fb2e155d238308f062c4b92bae716ac19f` in `https://github.com/blasrodri/near-test`

```sh
# wasi singlepass
cargo wasi build --bin benches --release
wasmer compile --singlepass ./target/wasm32-wasi/release/benches.wasi.wasm -o benches_singlepass
wasmer run ./benches_singlepass
```

```sh
# rust native
cargo run --bin benches --release
```

Overall: the difference between the two versions (native vs wasi + singlepass are)

```
ed25519: 25.64x slower
ecdsa: 20.75x slower
shnorrkel: 24.86x slower
```

> - What is the impact of not doing this?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### What is the impact of not doing this?
```

  Costs of running IBC compatible trustless bridges would be very high. Plus, the fact that signature verification
  is such an expensive operation will force the contract to split the process of batch verification of signatures
  into multiple transactions.

> - Why is this design the best in the space of possible designs?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Why is this design the best in the space of possible designs?
```

  Adding exisiting proved and vetted crypto crates into the runtime is a safe workaround. It will boost performance
  between 20-25x according to our benchmarks. This will both reduce operation costs significantly and will also

>   enable the contract to verify all the signatures in one transaction, which will simplify the contract design.

Reviewer: I don't necessarily agree that it is a safe workaround. The cost of introducing a new host function is actually quite high:
* A bug in the host function code would cause the entire network to go down
* Once the host function is introduced, one cannot remove it as that could break contracts which already rely on the behavior of the host functions.

Author: Maybe "safe workaround" isn't the right way of putting it. However, these are highly adopted libraries with operations that are part of multiple services and blockchains. In that way, I was trying to convey the fact that these are no new functions that haven't been battle-tested. If you have any suggestions on how to communicate it differently I'd be happy to update it.

> - What other designs have been considered and what is the rationale for not choosing them?
>   This has been answered before.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### What other designs have been considered and what is the rationale for not choosing them?
  <replicate the text from the answer above>
```

> ## Specification

Reviewer 2: The list of native host functions being added should probably be moved from the section above to this section. This section ought to describe what the protocol looks like after the change is made and the section above should be limited to describing _why_ the change like this is being made.

Author: I've moved it, thanks

compiled to WASM as mentioned in [Zulip](https://near.zulipchat.com/#narrow/stream/295302-general/topic/light_client).

Polkadot uses [three different cryptographic schemes](https://wiki.polkadot.network/docs/learn-keys)
for its keys/accounts, which also translates into different signatures types:

- The vanilla ed25519 implementation using Schnorr signatures.
- The Schnorrkel/Ristretto sr25519 variant using Schnorr signatures.
- ECDSA signatures on secp256k1

## Rationale and alternatives

Add three signature verification signatures functions into the runtime as host functions.

- ED25519 signature verification function
- SR25519 signature verification function
- ECDSA signature verification function

using `ed25519_dalek`, `schnorrkel` and `secp256k1` crates into NEAR runtime as pre-compiled functions.

Note: seems like `ecdsa_verify` is implemented, but called `erecover` in https://github.com/near/nearcore/blob/master/runtime/near-vm-logic/src/logic.rs#L1049
Upon confirmation, we can proceed to remove it.

Benchmarks were run using a signature verifier smart contract on-chain importing the aforementioned functions from

> widespread used crypto Rust crates. The biggest pitfall of that solution

Reviewer 2: What solution is “that solution” referring to here? I would imagine computing these signatures in WASM? Please make the wording more precise.

```

Overall: the difference between the two versions (native vs wasi + singlepass are)

```
ed25519: 25.64x slower
ecdsa: 20.75x slower
shnorrkel: 24.86x slower
```

### What is the impact of not doing this?

Costs of running IBC compatible trustless bridges would be very high. Plus, the fact that signature verification
is such an expensive operation will force the contract to split the process of batch verification of signatures
into multiple transactions.

### Why is this design the best in the space of possible designs?

Adding exisiting proved and vetted crypto crates into the runtime is a safe workaround. It will boost performance
between 20-25x according to our benchmarks. This will both reduce operation costs significantly and will also
enable the contract to verify all the signatures in one transaction, which will simplify the contract design.

### What other designs have been considered and what is the rationale for not choosing them?

Adding exisiting proved and vetted crypto crates into the runtime is a safe workaround. It will boost performance
between 20-25x according to our benchmarks. This will both reduce operation costs significantly and will also

> enable the contract to verify all the signatures in one transaction, which will simplify the contract design.

Reviewer 2: This is just a copy of the text from a subsection above, isn’t it?

One alternative I can think of is improving the runtime implementation sufficiently that it compiles WASM code to a sufficiently fast machine code in the first place. It won’t be as fast as LLVM produced code due to the need for gas accounting and such, and it would take a ton of effort, compared to adding a host function, but it is an alternative worth spelling out.

Another alternative is to deal with high cost of computing/verifying these signatures in some other manner – such as decreasing the overall cost of gas and increasing the limits of gas available to attach to the contract. Again, not as straightforward as a host function to implement and is less localized of a change.

## Specification

This NEP aims to introduce the following host functions:

```rust

> pub fn ed25519_verify(sig: &ed25519::Signature, msg: &[u8], pub_key: &ed25519::Public) -> bool
> pub fn sr25519_verify(sig: &sr25519::Signature, msg: &[u8], pub_key: &sr25519::Public) -> bool
> pub fn ecdsa_verify(sig: &ecdsa::Signature, msg: &[u8], pub_key: &ecdsa::Public) -> bool
> ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
pub fn ed25519_verify(sig: &ed25519::Signature, msg: &[u8], pub_key: &ed25519::Public) -> bool;
pub fn sr25519_verify(sig: &sr25519::Signature, msg: &[u8], pub_key: &sr25519::Public) -> bool;
pub fn ecdsa_verify(sig: &ecdsa::Signature, msg: &[u8], pub_key: &ecdsa::Public) -> bool;
```
```

> Once this NEP is approved and integrated, these four functions will be available in the `near_sdk` crate in the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once this NEP is approved and integrated, these functions will be available in the `near_sdk` crate in the
```

these types of use cases (CPU intensive functions) and will certainly avoid the need of adding host functions.
The effort of adding such a feature will be significantly higher than adding these host functions one by one.
But on the other side, it will decrease the need of including more host functions in the future.

Another alternative is to deal with the high cost of computing/verifying these signatures in some other manner.
Decreasing the overall cost of gas and increasing the limits of gas available to attach to the contract could be a possibility.
Introducing such modification for some contracts, and not for some others can be rather arbitrary
and not straightforward in the implementation, but an alternative nevertheless.

## Specification

This NEP aims to introduce the following host function:

```rust
/// Ed25519 is a public-key signature system with several attractive features
///
/// Proof of Stake Validator sets can contain different signature schemes.
/// Ed25519 is one of the most used ones across blockchains, and hence it's importance to be added.
/// For further reference, visit: https://ed25519.cr.yp.to
/// # Cost
///

> /// `base + write_register_base + write_register_byte * num_bytes + ed25519_verify_base + ed25519_verify_byte * num_bytes`

Reviewer 4: Where did these gas costs come from? Please see my comment on the implementation PR and update accordingly. https://github.com/near/nearcore/pull/7165#discussion_r942131909

Author: Thanks! Will update this as soon as the PR reflects the right costs.

pub fn ed25519_verify(
    &mut self,
    sig_len: u64,
    sig_ptr: u64,
    msg_len: u64,
    msg_ptr: u64,
    pub_key_len: u64,
    pub_key_ptr: u64,
) -> Result<u64>;
```

And a `rust-sdk` possible implementation could look like this:

```rs

pub fn ed25519_verify(sig: &ed25519::Signature, msg: &[u8], pub_key: &ed25519::Public) -> bool;

```

Once this NEP is approved and integrated, these functions will be available in the `near_sdk` crate in the
`env` module.

## Security Implications (Optional)

We have chosen these crates because they are the ones already integrated into the
[sp_io](https://docs.rs/sp-io/latest/sp_io/)](https://docs.rs/sp-io/latest/sp_io/)
crate heavily used in the [substrate](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate) repository.

## Unresolved Issues (Optional)

- What parts of the design do you expect to resolve through the NEP process before this gets merged?

>   Both the function signatures and crates are up for discussion.

Reviewer: I suggest that we use the library that nearcore already uses for ed25519 signatures. This would avoid introducing new dependencies and ensure that NEAR signatures themselves can be 100% verified in smart contracts

Author: As far as I can see the proposal is the same as the one being used today
https://github.com/near/nearcore/blob/master/core/crypto/src/signature.rs#L729-L732
https://github.com/near/NEPs/pull/364/files#diff-1d8966e006ab1c29466f5c4d5ce49a965477f992e7d16c1d032d5b0164096459R38

Another alternative is to deal with the high cost of computing/verifying these signatures in some other manner.
Decreasing the overall cost of gas and increasing the limits of gas available to attach to the contract could be a possibility.
Introducing such modification for some contracts, and not for some others can be rather arbitrary
and not straightforward in the implementation, but an alternative nevertheless.

## Specification

This NEP aims to introduce the following host function:

```rust
/// Ed25519 is a public-key signature system with several attractive features
///
/// Proof of Stake Validator sets can contain different signature schemes.
/// Ed25519 is one of the most used ones across blockchains, and hence it's importance to be added.
/// For further reference, visit: https://ed25519.cr.yp.to
/// # Cost
///
/// `base + write_register_base + write_register_byte * num_bytes + ed25519_verify_base + ed25519_verify_byte * num_bytes`
pub fn ed25519_verify(
    &mut self,
    sig_len: u64,
    sig_ptr: u64,
    msg_len: u64,
    msg_ptr: u64,
    pub_key_len: u64,
    pub_key_ptr: u64,

>     register_id: u64,

Reviewer 5: What is `register_id` for? The result is just a boolean, it can be returned as `u64`.

Author: I'll update it then!

```

As an extra data point, when passing `--enable-simd` instead of `--singlepass`

```
ed25519: took 3085ms
```

Steps to reproduce:
commit: `31cf97fb2e155d238308f062c4b92bae716ac19f` in `https://github.com/blasrodri/near-test`

```sh
# wasi singlepass
cargo wasi build --bin benches --release
wasmer compile --singlepass ./target/wasm32-wasi/release/benches.wasi.wasm -o benches_singlepass
wasmer run ./benches_singlepass
```

```sh
# rust native
cargo run --bin benches --release
```

Overall: the difference between the two versions (native vs wasi + singlepass is)

```
ed25519: 25.64x slower
```

### What is the impact of not doing this?

Costs of running IBC-compatible trustless bridges would be very high. Plus, the fact that signature verification
is such an expensive operation will force the contract to split the process of batch verification of signatures
into multiple transactions.

### Why is this design the best in the space of possible designs?

Adding existing proved and vetted crypto crates into the runtime is a safe workaround. It will boost performance
between 20-25x according to our benchmarks. This will both reduce operating costs significantly and will also

> enable the contract to verify all the signatures in one transaction, which will simplify the contract design.

Reviewer 6: If Polkadot uses 3 different types of keys - are you still able to verify all the signatures in one transaction ? (for example in a scenario, where all the polkadot validators are using sr25519 ? )

fast machine code. Even when it may not be as fast as LLVM native produced code it could still be acceptable for
these types of use cases (CPU intensive functions) and will certainly avoid the need of adding host functions.
The effort of adding such a feature will be significantly higher than adding these host functions one by one.
But on the other side, it will decrease the need of including more host functions in the future.

Another alternative is to deal with the high cost of computing/verifying these signatures in some other manner.
Decreasing the overall cost of gas and increasing the limits of gas available to attach to the contract could be a possibility.
Introducing such modification for some contracts, and not for some others can be rather arbitrary
and not straightforward in the implementation, but an alternative nevertheless.

## Specification

This NEP aims to introduce the following host function:

```rust
/// Ed25519 is a public-key signature system with several attractive features
///
/// Proof of Stake Validator sets can contain different signature schemes.
/// Ed25519 is one of the most used ones across blockchains, and hence it's importance to be added.

> /// For further reference, visit: https://ed25519.cr.yp.to

Reviewer 7: I wonder if we should add more inline information about how `ed25519` works, in particular how it handles some of the edge cases. An alternative to add this information inline would be to add this information to [Nomicon](https://nomicon.io/), given `ed25519` is already a cyptographic primitive used in NEAR before this NEP.

The motivation is to allow potential new client implementations to be able to build the client by only reading Nomicon and NEPs.

```rust
/// Ed25519 is a public-key signature system with several attractive features
///
/// Proof of Stake Validator sets can contain different signature schemes.
/// Ed25519 is one of the most used ones across blockchains, and hence it's importance to be added.
/// For further reference, visit: https://ed25519.cr.yp.to
///
/// Verify an ED25519 signature given a message and a public key.
/// # Returns
/// - 1 meaning the boolean expression true to encode that the signature was properly verified
/// - 0 meaning the boolean expression false to encode that the signature failed to be verified
///
/// # Cost
///
/// Each input can either be in memory or in a register. Set the length of the input to `u64::MAX`
/// to declare that the input is a register number and not a pointer.
/// Each input has a gas cost input_cost(num_bytes) that depends on whether it is from memory
/// or from a register. It is either read_memory_base + num_bytes * read_memory_byte in the
/// former case or read_register_base + num_bytes * read_register_byte in the latter. This function
/// is labeled as `input_cost` below.
///
/// `input_cost(num_bytes_signature + num_bytes_message, num_bytes_public_key) +

> ///  ed25519_verify_base + ed25519_verify_byte * (num_bytes_signature + num_bytes_message)`

Reviewer 8: Double check that the cost matches what we actually charge. In partiuclar, I don't think we count signature lenght as a part of this component?

Author: [in the implementation](https://github.com/near/nearcore/pull/7165/files#diff-8df9ae8ecbf1224f7f000dd60280838a7399a49e00af2754cc41f5a4b1ac2640R1162) there's only variable cost for the message length. I can adjust it to match that.

Author: I've updated it

/// to declare that the input is a register number and not a pointer.
/// Each input has a gas cost input_cost(num_bytes) that depends on whether it is from memory
/// or from a register. It is either read_memory_base + num_bytes * read_memory_byte in the
/// former case or read_register_base + num_bytes * read_register_byte in the latter. This function
/// is labeled as `input_cost` below.
///
/// `input_cost(num_bytes_signature) + input_cost(num_bytes_message) + input_cost(num_bytes_public_key)
///  ed25519_verify_base + ed25519_verify_byte * num_bytes_message`
///
/// # Errors
///
/// If the signature size is not equal to 64 bytes, or public key length is not equal to 32 bytes, contract execution is terminated with an error. 
  fn ed25519_verify(
    sig_len: u64,
    sig_ptr: u64,
    msg_len: u64,
    msg_ptr: u64,
    pub_key_len: u64,
    pub_key_ptr: u64,
  ) -> u64;
```

And a `rust-sdk` possible implementation could look like this:

```rs

pub fn ed25519_verify(sig: &ed25519::Signature, msg: &[u8], pub_key: &ed25519::Public) -> bool;

```
The current implementation is imported from the crate `ed25519-dalek`, version 1. It uses no feature flags

> except from the default one. This is the exact same setup used in the crate `near-crypto`.

Reviewer 5: This sentence now seems redundant, given that the expected behavior is described below more thoroughly.

///
/// `input_cost(num_bytes_signature + num_bytes_message, num_bytes_public_key) +
///  ed25519_verify_base + ed25519_verify_byte * (num_bytes_signature + num_bytes_message)`
///
/// # Errors
///
/// The signature size is fixed and equal to SIGNATURE_LENGTH (64 bytes). In case the length of signature input is not equal to
/// SIGNATURE_LENGTH, then the function returns HostError::Ed25519VerifyInvalidInput with the message "invalid signature length".
/// 
/// A similar case occurs with the public key. Its size is known and its equal to PUBLIC_KEY_LENGTH (32 bytes). In case the
/// input length provided for the publc key doesn't match PUBLIC_KEY_LENGTH, the function will return the following error:

> /// HostError::Ed25519VerifyInvalidInput with the message "invalid public key length".

Reviewer 9: @matklad Do you think it is a good direction to go with extending `HostError` type or should we keep the scope of potential errors minimal?

Reviewer 8: I think this doesn't matter much: from the protocol perspective, how exactly `HostError` looks is unobservable. Implementation wise, adding a new variant there is OK.

But this actually points to the problem with wording of this NEP: what is written here is how the function would look inside `logic.rs`, but that's an impl detail which is completely irrelevant from the specification point of view. 

NEPs should say how the WASM import looks, not how it is implemented. For the time being, I'd rephrase this section as:

== Specification

The following host function is added

```rust
extern "C"{

/// Verify an ED25519 signature given a message and a public key.
/// # Returns
/// - 1 if the signature was properly verified
/// - 0 if the signature failed to be verified
///
/// # Cost
///
/// Each input can either be in memory or in a register. Set the length of the input to `u64::MAX`
/// to declare that the input is a register number and not a pointer.
/// Each input has a gas cost input_cost(num_bytes) that depends on whether it is from memory
/// or from a register. It is either read_memory_base + num_bytes * read_memory_byte in the
/// former case or read_register_base + num_bytes * read_register_byte in the latter. This function
/// is labeled as `input_cost` below.
///
/// `input_cost(num_bytes_signature + num_bytes_message + num_bytes_public_key) +
///  ed25519_verify_base + ed25519_verify_byte * num_bytes_message`
///
/// # Errors
///
/// If the signature size is not equal to 64 bytes, or public key length is not equal to 32 bytes, contract execution is terminated with an error. 
  fn ed25519_verify(
    sig_len: u64,
    sig_ptr: u64,
    msg_len: u64,
    msg_ptr: u64,
    pub_key_len: u64,
    pub_key_ptr: u64,
  ) -> u64;
}
```

That is: 

* write the exten function from perspecive of the contract
* don't mention HostError, as that is unobservable to contracts (it is more or less like panic)

We could perhaps consider using proper wasm for the spec here

```wasm
(module 
  (import "env" "ed25519_verify" (func (param 64) ... (result i64)))
)
```

but I feel that Rust-syntax to experss that is more accessible, and better matches what we've been doing historically

Author: Updated it

pub fn ed25519_verify(sig: &ed25519::Signature, msg: &[u8], pub_key: &ed25519::Public) -> bool;

```
The current implementation is imported from the crate `ed25519-dalek`, version 1. It uses no feature flags

> except from the default one. This is the exact same setup used in the crate `near-crypto`.

Reviewer 9: @abacabadabacaba Can you maybe help to identify how to state this requirement in a crate-agnostic way, so we don't get tied to the exact implementation?

Reviewer 5: @frol It is difficult to describe the specific behavior concisely without referring to a specific implementation. [This blog post](https://hdevalence.ca/blog/2020-10-04-its-25519am) describes the various ways in which the existing Ed25519 implementations differ in practice. The behavior that we are using, which is shared by Go `crypto/ed25519`, Rust `ed25519-dalek` (using `verify` function with `legacy_compatibility` feature turned off) and several others, makes the following decisions:

* The encoding of the values $R$ and $s$ must be canonical, while the encoding of $A$ doesn't need to.
* The verification equation is $R=[s]B-[k]A$.
* No additional checks are performed. In particular, the points outside of the order-<span></span>$l$ subgroup are accepted, as are the points in the torsion subgroup.

While the above hopefully describes the behavior that we seek in an unambiguous manner, we may still want to point to a specific implementation to refer to in case of an ambiguity.

Reviewer 9: @abacabadabacaba Thank you!

@blasrodri Please, include the proposed details into the NEP

Author: @frol updated it

Reviewer 5: @blasrodri Probably Security Implications is not the most appropriate place for this, this should probably rather go just above this thread. Also, whenever the `ed25519-dalek` crate is mentioned, it should be specified that `verify` function should be used. This is because there are other verification functions in this crate (`verify_strict`, `verify_batch`) that behave differently.
